Good morning.
I'd like to welcome you all to the
WebObjects State of the Union session.
We have a full week of sessions for you,
and this is the kickoff for the
suite of WebObjects sessions.
Before getting started,
I wanted to thank all of you for
getting up so early and joining us.
I apologize for the start time
of these conference sessions.
But we have so much to fit into the week
that we have to get a pretty early start.
So I'd like to introduce Bob Fraser.
He is the WebObjects
Product Marketing Manager.
Bob?
Morning everybody.
I just gave Tony my hat that I tend
to wear around here at the conference,
making me a little bit
of an easier target.
I really like interacting with
customers and that will make
me a little bit easier to find.
So WWDC is kind of a special
time for me because I joined
Apple just before last year's WWDC.
I'm having a ball at
Apple and I love WebObjects.
So I was never at Next.
I was an old list machine hacker.
And these were machines that
were built from the ground
up to run Lisp on hardware.
They had an object-oriented
layer on there.
They had development environment.
And what I remember about it is
I remember the incredible power
of that development environment
and how it allowed me to do more.
I remember basically how I could--I was
amazed at what I could do by writing
just a few well-placed lines of code.
And those are exactly the same things
that I love about WebObjects today.
That same kind of power,
that same kind of elegance
of object-oriented code,
that same of object-oriented
design and what you can really do.
So welcome to WebObjects:
State of the Union.
This is, I guess,
the intro session for a whole track.
And let me grab the clicker here.
So over the course of this,
we've had a very full year.
Last year at WWDC was the
introduction of WebObjects in Java.
Since then,
we've released WebObjects 5.1,
and we have other great
things in the works.
So over the course of this presentation,
you'll get to meet some of the people
who are the developers of WebObjects.
You'll get to meet some of
the people behind the scenes
who are supporting WebObjects.
And we'll talk about WebObjects past,
present.
And one of the great things about
this year's WWDC is that the
cone of silence has been lifted.
And we'll actually be able to
talk about future directions.
And in quite a number of the
sessions that are here at WWDC,
you'll be able to see technology
demonstrations of the feature
sets that we're working on.
We will also have a presentation--
Thank you.
Over this year,
our documentation team has
been working very hard as well.
They've written hundreds of
pages of new documentation.
So we'll get a presentation from them.
And we'll also hear from our professional
services and our training folks.
At the end,
because WebObjects is so comprehensive,
we'll kind of go over different
tracks you may want to follow
of the WebObjects sessions,
depending on your
familiarity with WebObjects.
So let's get started.
WebObjects is a powerful set of tools,
frameworks, and runtimes for developing
and delivering Java and
web-based applications.
It's an Apple software product,
and in it you get everything you need.
You get an integrated
development environment.
We take care of database
mapping and getting the data
out of a database for you.
We take care of the presentation
layer and delivering that data
to the end user experience.
There's graphical design tools
for designing user interfaces.
There's a visual development
environment tools that let you
do drag and drop programming.
And we even throw in
an application server.
The key advantages of WebObjects
are faster development,
better results at the end of the day,
and lower overall costs.
and the way we accomplish this: First,
we've got great tools.
And these tools allow you
to get to market quicker.
They work in conjunction with frameworks
that have been developed over years
and have best practices programming
and that do a lot of the heavy lifting
for you and handle a lot of detail
things and perform a lot of really
hard tasks so that you don't have to.
and it's all object oriented
and the frameworks foster reuse.
So this makes incremental
development easy.
And incremental development is
good because your user requirements
are constantly changing.
And so what you can do is you
can do evolutionary programming.
You can do rapid turnaround.
You can do things like that.
And so that gets things out
quicker and makes it easier
to design and deliver better.
And also, because of these frameworks,
the more we do and maintain,
the less code that you have to
write and the less code you have to
the less code you have to maintain.
So, the key features that
WebObjects is known for:
automated database access,
page generation.
You can also deliver very compelling
desktop applications as well.
A complete set of integrated tools
and your choice of deployment.
Let's look at an application
server architecture.
The goal here, the name of the game,
is to try and get content delivered
on the right-hand side of the
screen in either a web application
or other application interface.
And the simplest form of that
would be a static HTML page being
delivered from a web server.
That's okay, and that definitely serves
a good purpose out there,
but you know,
things are evolving on the web.
And so what you really want for
a compelling experience is to be
able to take user interaction that
comes in and have dynamic content.
Dynamic content would tend to be
delivered from data sources represented
on the left-hand side of the screen here.
And so the way that's often done in an
application server is the application
server is kind of a middleman,
and it would use templates
and business logic,
or application logic.
And you mix in the user
requirements with the data,
and you muddle it around a little bit,
and then you figure out how
you're going to present it.
And WebObjects does all that.
And we have what would be considered
a classic three-tiered architecture.
You have the presentation layer,
in this case showing HTML.
You've got an application server
that would model your business logic.
And you have your data
sources or your data layer.
Now what makes WebObjects unique
is wrapped around all of this,
we have a very powerful object model.
So we have a very powerful object model.
We also have very clean
separation of these layers.
We also have frameworks for each layer.
We also have tools that
work with each layer.
In addition, we're not limited to
just delivering HTML.
We can also deliver full
desktop applications and
Java swing-based applications.
Let's look at the data layer.
So here we want to get data out of
a database or data source and get
that represented as Java objects.
So we have a tool called
ELModeler and frameworks called
Enterprise Objects Frameworks.
What they'll do is they'll
do object relational mapping.
We can even go so far as to go in
and reverse engineer your database,
figure out what's inside,
understand the schema,
figure out all of the
tables that are in there.
And then for the entities you select,
we'll figure out all the
attributes that are in the columns,
and we'll model that all up,
pick the fields that you want us to,
put those into Java objects,
and we do that without you
having to write any SQL.
We also provide a nice high-level
interface to it so that you have an
abstraction layer that eliminates
having to know the intricacies
of the particular databases.
This makes it easy to use
alternative databases and you can
switch databases without having
to change your application.
And another very powerful feature
is the ability to do a unified
query across multiple databases.
We also handle all of
the persistence for you.
So we'll take care of the reads,
the updates, the deleting of the objects
and map all of that for you.
So you get a very nice
high-level interface.
We take care of all the database details.
And we're not limited to JDBC databases.
We can also work with JNDI data
sources such as an LDAP directory.
So now we have our data out of the
database into our business logic,
so we figure out what we want to do with
the data and how we want to present it.
So this is page generation
or the presentation layer.
WebObjects has a very classical
design pattern approach,
model view controller,
very nice clean separation
for generating HTML.
But we're not limited to just HTML.
We can generate HTML.
We can generate XML streams.
We can generate SMIL,
which is a multimedia
interaction language.
And we can also interact with JSPs.
There's even a Taglib interface
because there's a lot of
JSP programmers out there.
You can actually take the
generation streams called "bo"
components and you can actually
embed those in Java server pages.
So you have choices in all of this.
And WebObjects is also really great
at handling multi-language websites.
We'll see an example of that a bit later.
So you can do all of
the different streams,
HTML, XML, and such.
You can also build full
desktop applications,
distributed desktop
applications in there.
We have different flavors of these,
some that require actually writing,
that don't require
writing any code at all,
that are generated automatically.
And then they're all extensible,
and we have GUI tools for doing
UI layout and things like that.
And this is really,
really powerful because there's a lot
of things that we can do with this.
Occasionally,
HTML interfaces are great because they're
immediate access anywhere you are.
All you need is a web browser.
They're very universal.
But occasionally,
it can be a royal pain to have to
click through like 18 web pages to try
and get to the thing that you want.
And that's where a really nice,
interactive,
like tabbed user interface like we have
here is a very powerful thing to have.
There are other advantages in
that because it is a distributed
client/server architecture,
you can actually decide where
you want the objects to live.
So you can do processing on the
client-side computer as well.
You still can maintain security
because you get the choice of
where your business logic lives.
You can keep sensitive
things on the server side.
So we have, I think,
unique in the industry,
I think some of our tools are
the capabilities that we have,
I don't see matched in anything else.
So all of this is supported
by a suite of tools.
Project Builder on 10.
There's the Project Builder
and there's sessions that will
familiarize you with that.
There's also Project Builder on Windows.
There's Enterprise Object Modeler,
which handles the mapping,
the object relational mapping,
going from your database
to your Java objects.
There's a combination HTML editor and
binding editor called WebObjects Builder.
Then those are used to get your model,
get your layout, get your application up.
And then WebObjects Builder would be
used for the HTML type of generation
or stream type of generation.
And then if you're doing our
powerful rule-based paradigm,
our direct-to-web, our direct-to-Java,
and the other one I haven't
told you about yet,
we have the rule editor and we have
interface builder which can let you
build for Java client applications,
can and let you build user interfaces.
All of this, and it even comes with its
own application server.
But you don't have to use that
application server if you don't want to.
You get your choice of deployment.
So we provide, with this,
a full J2SE application server
that is standalone that you can
run anywhere you've got JRE.
And it also supports
Enterprise Java beans.
But with WebObjects 5.1,
You can actually deploy to
other application servers.
All you need is a servlet container.
And this is all very scalable.
and the licensing on this is very
flexible and very inexpensive.
So here we have a diagram showing the two
different alternatives for deployment.
On the right, you would see using a
WebObjects application server
with Enterprise Java beans
being hosted in there.
And in the left-hand diagram,
you'd see using a J2SE application
server and running a WebObjects
application as a servlet.
All of this for the low price of $6.99.
We have educational pricing available
as well and there are also discounts
for Select and Premier ADC members.
This is available as an Apple retail
product through all of our channels.
And for more information
there's a URL right there.
So that's a brief overview of WebObjects.
I'd like to mention some of the
features that went into WebObjects 5.1.
With 5.1, the more recent features
that we've added,
first and foremost is Java Server Pages
and Serverlet Integration.
This feature was heavily influenced
by this conference last year,
by conversations that I had with
you developers and colleagues had.
So I just wanted to thank you for
engaging us and giving this feedback.
This is really important in terms
of the direction of the product.
And the things that you tell us really do
influence the direction of the product.
We've also added
Enterprise Java Bean support.
We've added the LDAP,
or GNDi adapter that gives you
LDAP access and other GNDi sources.
We've made some enhancements to
the Java client technologies.
We've qualified a few
additional databases.
And there's been a lot of stuff that's
been going on in the documentation area.
We'll get a presentation
about that later.
[Transcript missing]
We've also added
Enterprise Java Bean support.
So this technology is based on OpenEJB.
OpenEJB is an open source project,
and Apple has contributed back
to that open source project.
It's an ongoing thing.
And not only do we
have the EJB container,
but we also have the other
giblets and gravy you need.
You also have the other
supporting elements you need,
like a transaction manager.
And we also have an orb, OpenOrb.
There are also tools and assistance
that let you author new beans and
we also have the ability to take
third party beans and put them
into a container and deploy them.
So I'd like to ask a question.
Is anybody using WebObjects for
the development of Java beans?
Okay, has anybody deployed third-party
Java beans in a WebObjects application?
Okay, got one over there.
How about servlets?
Has anybody deployed a WebObjects
application in a servlet container?
Got one over there.
Okay, thank you.
[Transcript missing]
If you look at EOModeler,
you'll find a new option that in
addition to a JDBC data source,
allows you to make a model
with a JNDI data source.
So it behaves very similarly in
terms of the user experience.
You take EOModeler, you create a model,
or you can reverse engineer
something like an LDAP directory.
And then it'll make a model,
and then that'll go through EOF,
and EOF will take care of getting all
the data in and out of the LDAP database.
So we can insert, we can update,
we can delete entries,
but there's no schema synchronization.
And there's a few other minor little
caveats because an LDAP database
is not a full relational database.
We also made some enhancements
to the Java Client technology.
Don't want to steal any
thunder from documentation,
but they wrote a great book,
WebObjects Desktop Applications,
which has an excellent tutorial on using
Direct-to-Java Client and Java Client.
We've also made some enhancements
to the class loader that's used in
Java Client desktop applications.
Basically,
what you can do is on a class basis,
you can decide which pieces would
get downloaded on a per-application
basis and which pieces would be
loaded on the machine one time.
So you could take all the common
classes that would be there for
any Java Client application and
pre-install those on the target machine,
on the client side.
And then any time you'd invoke
a new WebObjects application,
Java Client WebObjects application,
only the classes that were
different would need to be loaded.
There's also for the
rapid development mode,
where you are doing compile and testing,
there's a new switch,
WoW AutoOpen Client Application,
which is fairly self-explanatorily named.
And there's also a new little
utility called Java Client Launcher,
which assists in launching
Java client applications.
On Mac OS X, it's a double-clickable app.
You give it a URL,
it will talk to the WebObjects
server and take care of downloading
all the class files and launching
the application for you.
And then there's a command file
version of that on Windows.
We've also qualified two new
databases for WebObjects 5.1.
That is Microsoft SQL Server and MySQL.
So if you'd like to try this,
for those of you who
actually are 5.1 customers,
thank you.
We really appreciate your support.
And the response to WebObjects
5.1 has been very good,
and it's been a very popular release.
For those of you who
haven't tried it yet,
there's a trial download available.
If you go to Apple Developer Connection,
you need to register,
but registration is free.
You can go to the Download section,
and you go find Download Software,
and in the section under WebObjects,
you'll find WebObjects for Mac OS X.
And you can download that,
and the key for that is included as well,
and that'll be good
until the end of June.
For those of you who need
to trial a Windows version,
I have a few CDs with me,
and I'll be off sort of on
that side after the Q&A,
and I'm the guy with the hat.
So, some of the sessions you
might be interested in.
If you'd like to see more
about these features,
our session numbers are listed here.
We have them for EJB, servlet deployment.
The JDI stuff will be covered in the
modeling and connectivity session 7.11.
And we have two Java client sessions,
7.06 and 7.07.
So I'd like to make a
couple of announcements.
Our sustaining engineering team
works very hard and they're
kind of unsung heroes.
They have put out over the past year
four updates to WebObjects 4.5.1
Three updates to WebObjects 5.
A software update for WebObjects 5.1.
And I'm pleased to announce
the availability of software
update WebObjects 5.1.2.
So, there are fixes.
There are fixes in three main categories:
NS-Timestamp-related classes, EOF,
and EOModeler and FileMerge integration.
If you want to write down 75204,
there's a KBase article.
and that KBase article will have release
notes indicating the different changes,
the fixes that are in there.
And for Mac OS X, this is available
through software update.
And for the Windows and Solaris version,
when you find the KBase article,
it will have instructions
on how to download.
So, great job to the team there.
I'd also like to mention a little
bit about Enterprise Objects,
EOF.
So, these slides I borrowed from our VP.
I'd like to talk a little
bit about WebObjects past,
present, and future.
Because we occasionally get questions
about alternate languages and EOF.
So in the past, for people who were
programming in Objective-C,
WebObjects was in Objective-C and
EOF was in Objective-C,
so you had really clean
integration with Cocoa,
with Interface Builder,
and it all played nice.
The downside to this was it was not easy
to get new databases or data sources.
Somebody had to write an adapter.
And the other drawback now is
that this is specifically limited
to older versions of WebObjects.
The current situation with
WebObjects is now in Java,
and there's some real
advantages to being in Java.
Because it's in Java,
we get to play with the
rest of the Java community.
So we get access to JDBC data sources.
We get access to JNDI data sources.
So getting access to additional
databases is very easy.
and we're pleased to announce
that for those who are
doing Cocoa EOF programming,
there is an evaluation distribution
license available for Cocoa Java EOF.
And the details of that license
should be posted this week.
So this does require--.
Thank you.
This does require that you have to do
a little bit of Java programming at
the back end in your business logic.
Your application logic
can still be Objective-C.
You have access to Cocoa and
all those utilities.
So it's sort of Cocoa on the top
end and Java on the bottom end.
And I wanted to brand it Mocha,
but they told me that
probably isn't a good idea.
So moving forward in the future,
This is sort of an interim situation.
Moving forward, the goals are to improve
the runtime efficiency,
to offer a choice of
programming language,
including the business logic,
Native Objective-C types
Better integration of EOF and Interface
Builder and Palettes Over the future
EOF and various pieces of EOF are
going to influence Objective-C and the
classes that are associated with it.
And that's about all that I'm
at liberty to say at this time.
What I can talk about are
the directions of WebObjects.
so first illegal disclaimer this is the
part the auto commercial with a guy talks
really fast uh... basically this being
apple i can't make any specific promises
for any specific feature in any specific
release having said all that we are on
tell you are our future directions but
things that were working on and sessions
that shows you'll get the numbers for
here we're actually showing technology
demonstrations of things that we actually
have working and we can demonstrate.
So, Web Services are a big buzz in the
industry and we're working on what
we think are some really exciting
offerings in the Web Services space.
And I think this is going to
be really key for WebObjects
and also WebObjects at Apple.
Because you're going to see
WebObjects being pervasive in a lot
of the technologies here at Apple.
We're going to offer web
services utilizing our powerful
rule-based programming model and
offer direct-to-web services.
We've worked a lot on
the XML serialization and
deserialization of objects as well,
so there's some
XML serialization classes.
We're integrating Java Web Start with
Java Client technology.
This will be an upgrade installation,
and there's a new tool called
EO Bean Builder used for
developing enterprise Java beans.
So, a little background on web services.
There's a session,
I'll get the session number later,
I think it's the Java one,
where they actually go into quite a
bit of detail on what the web services
are and how they're implemented.
Basically, web services are sort of a
glorified remote procedure call.
I mean, yeah, there's some subtleties,
but at the end of the day,
that's kind of what the whole intent was.
So why would anybody really care?
It really is about
application interaction,
and at least it's
standards-based this time.
The other thing that's going on
in the industry is that the hype
is actually starting to give way
to real implementations out there.
There are tool sets that are coming up
and there are people who are actually
doing stuff with web services now.
There are some issues that
have been kind of glossed over
that haven't been resolved yet.
What's the security model?
How do you manage a fabric or
grid or nodes of web services?
What happens if they go away?
So I think a lot of what
goes on in the media,
they're talking about, I don't know,
hailstorms and passports
and going all over the place
with all this big B2B stuff.
And someday I do believe
that will come about.
But that is sort of, I think,
a little more distant.
But what is actually real, and sort of,
if you could put your
finger on it right now,
and what people are really doing
is application-to-application
integration and utilizing existing data
sources that they have in new ways.
And we're offering very compelling
technologies that make this really,
really easy to do.
These will probably be
inside the firewall.
They'll probably be like IT departments
or people who control their own domain.
You'll probably have the ability to do
things that go across departments maybe,
but they may still be
in the same company.
And we're seeing this shift,
we're seeing this trend
starting to happen right now.
So the offerings.
WebObjects will be a
web service producer.
So we'll be like a
server of web services.
And we'll be able to deliver
RPC-based web services as well
as messaging-based services.
We'll even take care of generating
the WSDL configuration files,
or description files, for web services.
WebObjects applications will also be
able to act as a web service consumer.
And so as a web service consumer,
what we'll do is take the WSDL file,
generate proxy classes,
and call the web service on your behalf.
and they get convenient to
package and get at the attributes.
So you could use this
for data aggregation.
You could take a little
bit of a web service,
something out of a database,
maybe something from an LDAP source,
mix it all together and then
present the results that you want,
do the aggregation that
you want for a user.
To get you really jump started,
we'll have direct-to-web services.
This will use our powerful rule-based
paradigm and the power of EOModeler.
Basically what you can do is you
take a WebObjects application and
From your data source,
from your database or
LDAP directory or whatever,
We can take those EOs and then you
have management and configuration
tools that allow you to automatically
turn those into web services.
There's a powerful assistant that
lets you decide what pieces of the
data source are going to get vended,
what the XML is going to look like,
and what things you're not going
to vend out into the public world.
And this is code free,
but it's extensible.
You can extend it with the rule system.
You can even freeze pages and actually
do code generation and then you
can take the Java code and go ahead
and continue to modify that and
drop that in another application.
Some of this technology was
previewed in Ted's presentation and
we have a session on this as well.
So I think this is going to be really,
really, really powerful.
So code free, database persistence vended
through web services.
We're also working on some
new XML serialization classes.
These would parallel the
Java binary serialization classes.
So if something is serializable
and meets some other criteria,
you can make it XML serializable.
and you can use these to serialize and
deserialize objects into XML streams.
We also intend to include Xealin so that
you can actually add an XSLT transform
downstream from that if you want as well.
And there's also some somewhat little
bit more specialized cases of that
where you can actually turn these
into SOAP XML messages as well.
Now this is really handy for taking
objects that you may have been
binary serializing and then instead
archiving them in an XML format,
which would foster data interchange.
So if you need to take this
data and move it around or
give it to another application.
And then it also makes it easy to
turn this into your own protocol,
if you need a wire
protocol for something.
Java Web Start is becoming the
preferred way of deploying and
managing distributed Java applications.
So we're taking that technology
and we are incorporating that in
with the Java client technologies.
So we'll take care of generating the
necessary support files so that you
can use either our class loader or
you could use Java Web Start when
you want to go ahead and deploy a
distributed Java client application.
So Java Web Start ships
with every copy of Mac OS X.
So there's no integration or
download that needs to happen there.
And it's easily available from
Sun for the Windows platform.
Some additional features:
We intend for future
releases to be available,
or at least the next release,
we intend to have it as an upgrade
installation so that you don't have
to uninstall the old version of
WebObjects or burn down your partition.
And a new tool: EO Bean Builder.
This also, again, leverages the power of
EOF Frameworks and EO Modeler.
You basically can take an EO model,
your picture of the database,
and from that, what you can do is you can
generate home and remote interfaces
and implementations of a bean.
So, if you would like to be,
participate in our beta program,
if you'd like to be
considered as a candidate,
Go to applec.apple.com/webobjects.
It's a WebObjects application.
And sign up.
These are some of the session
numbers if you'd like to see some
of the technology demonstrations
we have for upcoming technologies.
There's also, I put one session on there,
8.04.
This is not a WebObjects session,
but it immediately follows this session.
And it is about the client
web services frameworks that
are going in in the OS level.
And so those of you who are very new to
WebObjects might want to stay in this
room for the introduction to WebObjects.
I think it's a technical overview.
I think it's a technical
overview session.
Those of you who are already
familiar with WebObjects but
are keen on web services may
want to check out session 804.
And then we have the other session,
704 for serialization, 707 WebStart,
and Enterprise Java Beans
and the Bean Builder in 708.
So I'd like to shift gears a
little and talk about WebObjects
and Apple and sort of the strategy
and how they play together.
So, Apple is a business.
Apple wants to make money.
and how does WebObjects help
Apple with its business?
I look at three key areas.
How does WebObjects help
Apple in Apple markets?
How does Apple use WebObjects
internally to drive our own business?
and at the end of the day Apple's a
hardware company but at the end of the
day Apple's not just a hardware company.
Apple offers hardware that
has an incredible wealth of
Software, user experience,
and stuff that comes around
what you buy from Apple.
And how does WebObjects play in
terms of integration or offering
more compelling solutions?
Key markets for Apple are education,
media, and an emerging market that
is coming on strong is the
scientific and technical community.
So in education, WebObjects is used in
student information systems,
it's been used in portals,
it's been used in the back end of
the enterprise doing billing and
paperless authorization systems.
In media companies,
WebObjects has been used for
asset management and for workflow.
And with the web services architecture
coming together and being able to
integrate with things like AppleScript,
I think this is going to be a very,
very booming area for WebObjects as well.
and the whole draw from the scientific
community for Mac OS X with its Unix
underpinnings and Java on every platform,
on every offering.
The scientific community is really coming
on over to Mac OS X and when they do,
they're also drawn to WebObjects as well.
How does Apple use WebObjects?
Well, internally,
we use it all over the place.
We can go look up our paycheck.
There's any registration pages for
signing up for technical training.
We've got lots of applications where we
use WebObjects to run our own business.
Another example is the Apple Store.
Y vamos a ver que esto no es en ingles,
es en espanol.
And my apologies to any
translators out there.
This is actually the
store page from Spain.
And I put this up here on purpose.
The Apple Store, the online store,
is really important to Apple.
We get a large part of our
revenue through the online stores.
There are dozens of online
presences around the world.
You can actually go and travel
the world from the Apple Store.
If you just go to the bottom of the page,
not shown on the screen here,
there's a little pull down that will take
you to two dozen different Apple Stores.
And you can just switch languages
by just hitting the pull down.
Managing this and delivering this,
50 different online presence would not be
possible without a tool like WebObjects.
and all of these elements on there,
know what language they're in,
know where to go get the image,
know where to get the
text that's appropriate,
and it all flows through.
And you think about how often we
have to turn the store and how often
we have to add new products and
how often we have to update this.
It would not be possible without
something like WebObjects.
ITools.
WebObjects drives ITools.
It's in all of the applications there.
And,
Since recently, there's a new iTool,
Mac.com Webmail, and this is a WebObjects
5.1-based application.
So I invite you to check that out.
Now, putting together solutions.
WebObjects is also very
powerful in that area as well.
And a couple of solution offerings
I'll talk about are PowerSchool and
Electronic Board Meeting Solution.
PowerSchool is a fairly
recent division of Apple.
It is award-winning student
information system software.
Its primary market is K-12.
What this allows Apple to do is increase
our offerings in the education market.
Instead of just putting
Macs in classrooms,
we actually can get into the enterprise,
get into the business of a school.
How does it get funded?
Attendance, managing records,
all those kinds of things.
And PowerSchool is a very powerful
application that helps foster
communication with the parents,
with the teachers,
with the administration.
It's driven by back-end data,
and it's all updated in real time.
Everything in here is
completely real-time based.
It's all WebObjects driven.
We have a solutions session that
will be later on in the week,
and the PowerSchool folks will actually
be giving a little presentation.
Apple's also announced another solution,
which is an electronic
board meeting solution.
So many boards,
like school boards and such,
have a legal requirement that they
make their agenda available to people,
and that people have access
to the information and can add
their things to the agenda,
stuff like that.
And the old way of doing that is a
photocopier and a lot of people running
around and making copies and having
to deliver them and stuff like that.
And the cost of that
is actually quite high.
And this is a real return on investment
because you can go paperless.
And when you go paperless with this,
it's like a collaboration system.
You basically, they can post the agenda,
they can have presentations,
and people can download these things
anywhere that they have a web access.
So that's us.
Now how can you guys deliver
applications and integration?
What are the opportunities?
What are some of the things that
would be really neat to do here?
Well, one thing I look at is, again,
this whole web services thing.
This is going to be pervasive
across Apple technologies.
There are Java toolkits that
can access web services.
AppleScript can access web services.
There are frameworks going into--there
are classes going into the frameworks
that can give you access to
web services from Objective-C,
from C++.
And these are all technologies
that are coming together near term.
So this gives you an opportunity to,
like for instance,
one of the things that I demoed at
Java 1 was an InDesign application
that was generating a real estate
brochure that could go to print.
And it was talking to
a WebObjects backend.
And we passed the data
using web services.
So AppleScript was driving InDesign
and it was getting the data from a
WebObjects database on the backend.
So there's an example of going
after like a media opportunity
in workflow or asset management.
Mac OS X Server is
another great opportunity.
WebObjects deployment is bundled
with every copy of Mac OS X Server.
And that is all of the hardware,
including a picture
that was shown earlier,
as well as the retail
box for OS X Server.
And it is our intent to
further integrate WebObjects
deployment with Mac OS X Server.
and one of the first areas that might
be interesting is open directory.
Now, Open Directory is a standards-based
directory service based on LDAP.
You have access layers,
you have a directory server,
and the directory server
will be part of OS X Server,
and there's directory tools.
So, kind of the net-net is a lot
of the same stuff that you
would get at through NetInfo,
groups and users and stuff like that,
as well as things you'd want
to put in an LDAP database,
like people's email addresses and
phone numbers or contact information.
They're going to be unified and
you'll have your choice of accessing
them either through NetInfo
interfaces or through LDAP interfaces.
That'll be part of the
server architecture.
So any LDAP client can get access to
anything that OS X server knows about.
And that would include WebObjects.
So you could take WebObjects,
Open up your modeler, go reverse engineer
the OS X server schema,
take that model, drop it into Java,
direct to Java client,
and in about 10 or 15 minutes,
you could build an administrative
tool without writing a line of code
that would go in there and have
access to like the user contact
information that was on 10 server.
All of WebObjects without
having to write any code at all.
So,
you get a lot of stuff with WebObjects.
It has a lot of things in there,
and we're adding more.
and I think that's enough of me rambling.
I'd like to turn this over to
Katherine Wenc to give a State of
the Union on our documentation.
Hi, I'm Katherine Wenc.
I'm Technical Publications
Manager for WebObjects,
and I'm happy to say that the state of
WebObjects documentation is fairly good.
Over the past year,
we've allocated more resources,
worked closely with engineering,
product marketing,
technical publications,
and other organizations
to create more content,
update our existing documentation set,
and maintain it on the website.
Over the next five minutes,
I'm going to talk about three things:
what we achieved for WebObjects 5.1,
what our future goals are,
and how to access the documentation.
We revised the site.
We made changes so that you can find
information more easily and efficiently.
It now has nine areas and it has
a search engine powered by Google.
Have any of you folks used the
ADC search engine powered by Google?
It works really well,
especially if you click on
the WebObjects button to limit
your search to WebObjects.
It works really well,
but I advise you to walk through the
site and understand what it contains,
because even though the Google search
engine works really well,
you can't find legacy
documentation with it.
But!
If you know to go to the
Legacy area on the website,
you can find the Legacy documentation.
We produced a lot of new
books for WebObjects 5.1.
With these new additions,
we've created over 500 new
pages of content for the
WebObjects 5.1 documentation set.
How many of you folks have
read some of the books?
At this time,
I'd like to thank everyone for
all the feedback on both the
WebObjects 5.1 documentation
and on documentation in general.
This feedback is critical.
It helps me provide direction to my
staff and helps me with my planning.
In addition to all the new books,
we updated several.
We are deploying WebObjects applications,
WebObjects overview, dynamic elements,
the release notes,
and the installation guides.
And we also, as you know,
have the API reference in Javadoc format.
For future releases,
we plan on making some changes
and adding some new documentation.
I'm going to steal back the
thunder that Bob stole from me.
WebObjects desktop applications is
now Java client desktop applications.
This new book,
which is available today on the website,
and you can also get
print-on-demand copies of it,
has enhanced tutorials, more sample code,
more information about the
benefits of using direct-to-Java
client versus Java client,
and it has information
on the rule system.
We're also adding new documents
to cover new features.
That would be web services
and XML serialization.
We're creating a new designing
Enterprise Objects book.
This will be similar to the
Enterprise Objects Framework
Developer's Guide that was last
released with WebObjects 4.5.
We're combining the information
in the installation guide and the
post-installation guide into one
comprehensive installation guide.
We're updating the programming topics.
I've received feedback that a lot of
you folks miss the programming topics,
but we're working hard to make
them more complete and accurate.
And we're also working to make
the API reference searchable
in Developer Help Center.
We want to make it so that you can
search the WebObjects API in the
same way you can now search the
Cocoa and Carbon API reference.
and if you're interested in this,
there's a session at 9:03 that
I believe is 5 to 6:30 p.m.
on Wednesday that there will be a
demo of the new full text search,
doc searching capability in Jaguar.
So if you'd like to go see that,
I advise you do.
You can access the documentation
in a variety of ways.
For the most up-to-date,
go to the website.
That's where we keep the latest
PDF and HTML copies of the books.
On the website,
if you go to Related Resources and
click on revante.com,
you can get print-on-demand
copies of some of our books.
On the product CD,
you can find the documentation in both
the high-level documentation folder and
when you install the developer package.
In the box,
we ship printed versions of printed
localized versions of some of our books.
Right now,
we ship the installation guide,
the What's New,
and the WebObjects overview.
For future releases,
we'd also like to ship Java client
desktop applications and
discovering WebObjects for HTML.
And last but not least,
check the Apple Developer Connection
newsletter.
That's the email that you
get each Friday for all the
updates on our documentation.
This concludes my presentation.
Again, I'd like to say how much
I appreciate all the feedback
and comments that you folks give.
Keep it coming.
and now I'd like to introduce,
well let me switch the slide here,
Joe Keenan of
Apple Professional Services.
I'm the manager of
Apple Professional Services Technical
Support.
Apple Professional Services is
comprised of technical support,
consulting engineering,
and integration services.
We work closely with the engineering
departments and also with Apple Training,
which is the next presenter up.
WebObjects is kind of an unusual
product in the Apple catalog,
if you will, because it's a commercial
developer product.
You're all aware most developer tools
and products from Apple are no charge.
You get it as part of the
Apple Developer Connection
membership or something like that.
WebObjects is a little unusual in
that it is a commercial product
with its own pricing and so on.
So there's a number of different
groups within Apple that are
involved in supporting WebObjects,
and that's mainly what I want to talk
about in a couple of minutes here.
On the sort of at the low end,
if you will,
installation and configuration,
the AppleCare phone centers handle
calls about installing WebObjects,
issues with if the licensing
didn't work or something like that,
or you have to do a reinstall or it
came with your Mac OS X server box.
So that's where that is handled.
That's that part of Apple.
For the developers in the world,
Apple Developer Connection
Technical Support,
DTS, provides code level support
for WebObjects developers.
And I mean, if you talk to a lot--there's
a number of DTS people that are
running this whole thing today.
They have a couple of specialists
in WebObjects in their organization.
But WebObjects is not
just a development tool.
WebObjects is, as Bob pointed out,
a complete deployment environment
of its own or integrates with
other deployment environments.
And it's somewhat unique at Apple.
There's very few products at
Apple that are cross-platform.
WebObjects runs not only on Mac hardware,
Mac OS X, but Windows, Solaris,
and a number of other places.
So the deployment piece of it
is and can be quite complex.
And that's where my organization,
Apple Professional Services Technical
Support,
comes in.
Because we provide services all
across the development environment,
all the way out through the
large-scale deployment world.
So when you're looking at your
needs for supporting WebObjects,
you've got to figure out
where in the spectrum you are.
For small-scale development,
code-level only issues,
DTS is your right channel.
But if you're developing
enterprise websites,
big commercial e-commerce,
or customer care, or banking,
or whatever, you need to be looking
at a commercial-grade,
enterprise-level technical
support organization.
And that's what
Professional Services Technical Support
is all about.
Professional Services, as I said,
also does consulting.
So you can obtain assistance, actually,
either on sort of a mentoring role.
Consultants come in from
Professional Services to
help your development team.
They'll do outsourced development.
If you want a site completely
built by Professional Services,
that's what they're there for.
Or somewhere in between.
So that's what they're there for.
training used to be part of that.
Dirk is going to talk about
the training part of it.
But that's where the technical,
the whole professional services
spectrum lies for WebObjects and
I don't want to take up a lot of your
time because I'm not going to talk
about any of the technical details.
But I will be here for the Q&A afterwards
if anybody has any questions about
who the right people to go to and
where you can get the assistance
you need for your WebObjects work.
Just come see me then.
And now I'm going to introduce
Contact information:
www.apple.com/services is the
professional services website.
There are subsections
underneath that for consulting,
integration, and technical support with
descriptions of the support programs.
Email services.apple.com and
phone for more information about
professional services products
and opportunities and so on.
WebObjects training, Dirk Johnson.
How are you doing today?
My name is Dirk Johnson.
I am a curriculum manager with
technical training and certification.
I don't know about you,
but I am very excited about the things
that I've heard today about WebObjects.
And of course,
that's why I'm in training,
because I'm so excited about it.
We offer three courses
regarding WebObjects.
First of all,
these courses are instructor-led,
hands-on training with labs and lecture.
We have very qualified trainers that go
pretty much everywhere to do training.
The first is WebObjects Development 1,
and this provides you the basic
foundational skill sets that you
need to do a WebObjects application.
We take you through the HTTP request,
HTTP response, how to pull data from,
put data back on the response.
We talk about control points,
customizing WebObjects.
We take you through building
an entire WebObjects
application from the ground up.
That's a five-day course.
The second is WebObjects Development 2.
So if you thought the
first one was intense,
and it will be intense, brain-hurting,
heart-pounding type of course,
WebObjects Development 2 is the same.
Your head's going to hurt at the end.
We take you through a lot of
advanced application designs,
such as handling what I call the bane
of WebObject or Web dynamic development,
handling the back button, localization,
getting down into the
deeper depths of EOF,
including the access
control and control layers,
things like that.
So very intense.
WebObjects is an entire platform,
and we do handle multiple
platforms in the course:
Solaris, Windows, and Mac OS X.
So how do you sign up?
Well, you can go to our website,
train.apple.com,
or you can actually call a
telephone number and sign
up for the latest courses.
Train.apple.com, by the way,
is also a WebObjects application.
Deployments, the three-day course,
the other two are five-day courses.
And again,
it's both lab and hands-on training.
And we do offer on-site training.
If you have enough engineers
where it would be cost-effective
for us to come out to your site,
we're happy to do that.
All right, I think I'll turn the
time back over to Bob.
Thank you.
So I'd like to review some of the
various tracks that we have here,
or sub-tracks of the
whole WebObjects track.
For those of you who are
fairly new to WebObjects,
these are some of the sessions that would
be good to get an introductory overview.
They cover the tools,
they cover the frameworks.
There's also a solutions session on
Friday where you can see what some of the
customers have been doing and what their
experience has been with WebObjects.
and David Walsh will be here
to talk about the WebObjects
and Enterprise Objects.
We also cover the Java Server pages
and the servlet deployment.
And there is also a project
builder session on Friday that
might be of interest as well.
and then our more advanced tracks:
Data Modeling and Connectivity,
and some more depth on EOF and optimizing
WebObjects applications and security
are also very popular sessions as well.
And then I just kind of wanted
to close with what might be the
interesting sessions for web services.
The session following this
will cover client-side web
services in the OS frameworks.
There's a Java session that
goes over like what XMLRPC is
and Jaxby in an acronym soup.
That'll be kind of where you
can find out accessing things
from the Java client side.
And then you definitely have
to check out session 705,
WebObjects and Web Services.
and with that,
I'd like to have some of our
team back up on the stage.
So you've met myself and
Joe and Dirk and Katherine.
I'd also like to take this time to invite
some members of the WebObjects team.
We have Tony Trujillo-Villan,
who is our director.
Todd Fernandez,
our Quality Manager Andreas Wenker,
Rapid Development Manager Jeff Glasson,
Framework Manager Francois Jouault,
Deployment Manager and Stan German,
Tools Manager.
We have a lab that is
downstairs in room L.
These are the hours.
And we are doing a conversion
workshop today from 2 to 6.
And you can sign up, first come,
first serve at the lab downstairs.
and we have some URLs and
these will be in the URL farm.
You can get myself or
Tony at WebObjects@apple.com.